Bullet Kin
Bullet Kin are one of the most common enemies. They slowly walk towards the player, occasionally firing a single bullet. They can flip tables and use them as cover. They will also deal contact damage if the player touches them.

Occasionally, Bullet Kin will have assault rifles, in which case they will rapidly fire 8 bullets towards the player before reloading. When an assault rifle wielding bullet kin appears, there will often be more in the same room.

On some occasions the player will also encounter incapacitated Bullet Kin lying on the floor. These Bullet Kin are props and disintegrate upon touch. They can be found in mass quantity in Oubliette.

In the Black Powder Mine, they can also ride Minecarts. In fact, if there are any unoccupied Minecarts within the room, they will take priority by walking towards them to ride in.

Trivia
Bullet Kin wield Magnums. Assault-rifle wielding Bullet Kin wield AK-47s.
Incapacitated Bullet Kin can be found in the Oublilette and Cannon's boss room.
In the Oubliette and the boss fight against Agunim, some room props resemble Bullet Kin poking out from inside barrels. This is likely a visual joke on a bullet inside a gun barrel.
In the Portuguese translation of the game, they are known as "Balùnculo", a portmanteau of the words "bala" (bullet) and "homúnculo" (homunculus).
Bullet Kin makes a playable appearance in the platform fighting games Indie Pogo and Indie Game Battle.
Bullet Kin is also a crossover skin in the game Riverbond.
Bullet Kin also has a cameo as lower and upper parts of a skin in the game Fall Guys: Ultimate Knockout.
Veteran Bullet Kin
Veteran Bullet Kin are similar to regular Bullet Kin, but have a higher rate of fire, higher shot speed and attempt to predict the player's movements. They also run faster than normal Bullet Kin, allowing them to catch up with the player quickly if they attempt to take cover.

They fire 4 bullets in a row. If the player moves out of sight from one then the Veteran will pause his attack and then fire the remaining bullets once he has caught up.

Bandana Bullet Kin
Bandana Bullet Kin behave like regular Bullet Kin, but their fire rate is heavily increased. Bandana Bullet Kin also have a higher magazine size than Bullet Kin that wield AK-47s, making them more relentless.

Trivia
Bandana Bullet Kin wield Machine Pistols.

Tanker
Tankers behave like regular Bullet Kin, but have higher health and higher rate of fire. Tankers can be spawned by Treadnaught.

Their rate of fire is slightly lower than that of Bandana Bullet Kin, but they are just as relentless.

Trivia
Tankers wield AK-47s.
The Tanker's expression in his Ammonomicon profile resembles that of the Bullet's avatar when talking to an NPC.

Minelet
Minelets behave like regular Bullet Kin, but will occasionally hide under their hard hat, deflecting incoming projectiles. They will then pop out from underneath their hard hat, releasing a ring of bullets in all directions.

Trivia
Minelets are a possible reference to Mets from the Mega Man series because of their similar behavior. They both hide under their helmets to protect themselves and attack when they emerge.

Cardinal
Cardinals behave like regular Bullet Kin, but have 50% higher health and will occasionally pause to shoot a group of 5 bullets that will home in on players.

Though a minor effect, these bullets spin around each other as they travel, similar to Apprentice Gunjurers. This occasionally allows them to slip through corners as only some of the bullets will be destroyed.

Trivia
Although normally seen in the Abbey & Hollow, a single cardinal may be seen in the first floor, tending to a small cemetery filled with gravestones. He is the only enemy in that room.
"Of the gun" is a play on the phrase "of the cloth", meaning a member of the clergy.

Shroomer
Shroomers behave like regular Bullet Kin, but have double health and fire two bullets in a V shape. Their bullets can be avoided by standing still, but this can jeopardise dodging the more accurate projectiles of any accompanying enemies. They may also spawn in Gungeon Proper, though rarely.

Trivia
Shroomers will misfire upon spawning, having to stand up after being spawned.

Ashen Bullet Kin
Ashen Bullet Kin have a higher rate of fire and higher shot speed than regular Bullet Kin. They seem to alternate between firing directly at the player and predicting their movements when shooting.

In some rooms of the Forge, Ashen Bullet Kin have the ability to spawn out of ashen statues, which allows them to catch the player off guard.

Trivia
The quote "Cinder Fella" is a clear wordplay between "Cinderella", the famous fairytale, and "Fella" a familiar term for a friend or a person that you consider close.
The French traduction of this quote "Balle au bois dormant" is also a wordplay between the fairytale "La belle au bois dormant" (Sleeping Beauty) and "Balle" (Bullet)
Like its normal counterpart, the Ashen Bullet Kin has a cameo as lower and upper parts of a skin in the game Fall Guys: Ultimate Knockout.

Mutant Bullet Kin
Mutant Bullet Kin behave like regular Bullet Kin, but have higher health and will occasionally stop to release a cone of poison creep. They are immune to Poison effects. The cone of poison can only be released horizontally, so attacking from above or below are the safer options.

Trivia
Its subtitle references Old Faithful, a geyser in Yellowstone National Park.

Fallen Bullet Kin
Fallen Bullet Kin walk towards the player, firing spreads of 3 fire-shaped bullets. They leave behind a small patch of fire upon death. Despite this, they are not immune to fire damage.

Notes
Fallen Bullet Kin will leave their pools of fire in the area where they took the blow that killed them. It will not be spawned where their death animation ends.
Trivia
Fallen Bullet Kin wield Pitchforks.
The sounds that Fallen Bullet Kin make are lower pitched versions of regular Bullet Kin.
These enemies can also be spawned by Lament Configurum.
A portrait of a Fallen Bullet Kin can be seen in the Abbey of the True Gun.
In the Portuguese translation of the game, they are known as "Ex-Balùnculo" (Ex-Bullet Kin), so in that version of the game, it is implied that they are no longer a type of bullet kin, this transformation may have happened through their death, where they were sent to the Sixth Chamber.

Keybullet Kin
Keybullet Kin run away from the player, and drop a key upon death. However, if the player does not manage to kill them in time, they will disappear.

Unlike other Bullet Kin, Keybullet Kin do not deal contact damage if they run into the player.

Jammed Keybullet Kin drop 2 keys instead of 1. These Jammed variations run faster and will take less time to teleport away from the player if they are not destroyed quickly.

If a Keybullet Kin is knocked into a pit, it will not drop a key.

The chances for a specific number of Keybullet Kin to spawn on a floor are:

0	1	2
50%	30%	20%
Trivia
Keybullet Kin may appear in boss arenas during the Boss Rush.
Keybullet Kin have a small chance to appear in elevator rooms at the start of a floor.
Killing 15 Keybullet Kin unlocks the Springheel Boots.
Keybullet Kin and Chance Kin's behavior is modeled after the Crystal Lizards from the Souls series and the Wandering Madness from Bloodborne. Both are harmless "enemies" that quickly run away from the player—often leading them directly into the path of danger—and despawn after a short time, with the promise of valuable loot if they are killed.

Chance Kin
Chance Kin run away from the player, and drop a random pickup upon death. However, if the player does not manage to kill them in time, they will disappear. Jammed Chance Kins have a chance to drop twice the loot.

The chances for a specific number of Chance Kin to spawn on a floor are:

0	1	2
50%	30%	20%
Trivia
Chance Kin may appear in boss arenas during Boss Rush.
Chance Kin have a small chance to appear in elevator rooms at the start of the floor.
The Chance Kin's subtitle is a reference to the common phrase "No Second Chances."
Chance Kin block player movement during their death animation.
Chance Kin can appear in the same room as a Keybullet Kin.
Keybullet Kin and Chance Kin's behavior is modeled after the Crystal Lizards from the Souls series and the Wandering Madness from Bloodborne. Both are harmless "enemies" that quickly run away from the player—often leading them directly into the path of danger—and despawn after a short time, with the promise of valuable loot if they are killed.

Confirmed
Confirmed are mysterious cloaked Bullet Kin. They stroll towards the player, occasionally stopping to fire four slithering lines of bullets at the player from under their hoods.

Confirmed do not appear in specific room layouts. Instead, they have a small chance to replace an enemy in any room. Only one Confirmed can appear on each floor.

Defeating ten Confirmed unlocks the Yellow Chamber.

Trivia
The splash art for Confirmed show them having dozens of red eye-like bullets residing within their cloaks. This bears resemblance to the High Priest's splash art.
The Confirmed are referred to by numerous other names in the game's code, such as 'Kaliber Cultist', and 'Faceless Cultist'.

Red-Caped Bullet Kin
Bullet Kin with red capes will rarely appear in random rooms after at least one Past has been killed. These Bullet Kin do not attack the player, and wander aimlessly. If it is the only enemy remaining in the room and it is left alone for long enough, it will disappear. After this happens 5 times, The Bullet is unlocked, and Red-Caped Bullet Kin stop spawning.

The chances that one will spawn on the six main floors are as follows:

1	2	3	4	5	6
8%	8%	12%	16%	20%	25%
A floor can only contain a maximum of one caped bullet (with one known exception outlined below). There is a 49.95% chance of one or more Red-Caped Bullet Kin appearing in a full run through the Forge, and a 62.46% chance on a run through Bullet Hell.

Trivia
Red-Caped Bullet Kin wield Magnums, but do not fire them or point them at the player.
Red-Caped Bullet Kin do not deal contact damage unless they are jammed.
Red-Caped Bullet Kin's design may be based on The Kid from I Wanna Be The Guy.
Rooms created by the Drill can have a Red-Caped Bullet Kin spawn inside them, even if a Red-Caped Bullet Kin has already appeared on that floor.
It's possible for Red-Caped Bullet Kin to appear in the Aimless Void and Secret Floors such as the Oubliette.
Red-Caped Bullet Kin are not attacked by companions.
Red-Caped Bullet Kin will teleport away if the room contains an enemy that cannot be killed, such as Gunreapers or Dead Blows.