---The Paths through the Underground/Underdark---(9 days of travel)
Wandering through the dark tunnels, the rushing sounds of the underground river begin to fade as it diverges from the cavern. You walk on for miles, the smell of hard water and wet earth. Natural chambers and cavern passways are chained together by the stretches of burrowed earth left in the wake of this massive worm-like creature. Clusters of crystal and other beautiful minerals occasionally line the walls and ceilings of the chambers, glittering with the little light you have to shove back the darkness.

Day 1 goes without issue... sleep.

Day 2 – Ropers
After a few miles of winding tunnel, you emerge in a smaller grotto of stalactites and stalagmites dripping with condensation. Unsure if the same underground river, or another water source, is nearby, you can see quite a bit of ground water does funnel down into this area. Seeking the next burrowed entrance left by the Kryn...
---ENCOUNTER – Ropers x 2---
Day 3 goes without issue...sleep.

Day 4 - Kobold Trap
Part way into the journey, the path becomes a protracted tunnel, snaking through the rock for hours without end. Eventually, you begin to notice other smaller tunnels intersecting with the burrowed canal. They appear partially ruined by this fresher tunnel, many of them now filled or partially collapsed.

They are no more than 2-3 feet wide, and numerous (dozens).

In some of the rubble, you can find broken tools... a hammer, some soiled leather, a knife.

The tunnel finally seems to open into a small 15-foot high, 30ft long chamber of dirt and rock, where a rather rancid smell lingers. Glancing within, a handful of the smaller tunnels seem to intersect with it, and whomever enters first (if not Cad), their leg is SNARED by a noose and they must make a Dexterity Saving Throw (DC 15) or be lifted into the air to dangle from a small trap (restrained, DC 16 to escape). The snare also drags a cable tied to numerous pans and metal scraps, making a ruckus!

Chattering and tiny warcrys begin to fill the tunnel from all sides... as dozens of small kobolds rush into the room, and from behind!

-ENCOUNTER: Kobolds x 26, Kobold Inventor x 1-
“Loud food! Loud meal!”

When seeing the group, they bark and growl. (if noticed, they appear rather fearful)

“You! Give us stuffs! Give us foods! Drop things you have, or we stab stab!”

If asked about tunnel “Big worm eat through! Bring ingoeth! In and out, gone quick, leave mess!”

They must parlay with them, avoiding a battle with a significant trade, or intimidation. Otherwise, a fight ensues! Either way, two kobolds are too scared and freeze up. They are brothers Spurt and Bex, scavenger kobolds. They are timid, but know the tunnels well...ish?